Add How-To Guides (#15)
pace-neutrons/resolution_functions: docs/source/howtos/add_model.rst

  independent variables. These pre-computed, intermediate values should be
  stored as instance variables.

  * For more complex calculations, it might be advisable to break them up into
    multiple methods. Any such methods should be private (i.e. start with ``_``)
    and, if possible, should be made ``@staticmethod`` or ``@classmethod``.

* It *should not* keep a reference to ``model_data``.

For example:

.. code-block:: Python

    from resolution_functions.models.model_base import InstrumentModel, InvalidInputError

    class TestModel(InstrumentModel):
        def __init__(self, model_data: TestModelData, e_init: float | None = None, **_):
            super().__init__(model_data)

            if e_init is None:
                e_init = model_data.default_e_init
            elif not model_data.e_init_restrictions[0] <= e_init <= model_data.e_init_restrictions[1]:
                raise InvalidInputError('Good message')

            self.useful_value = 0.5 * e_init ** 3

Lastly, the ``__call__`` method must be implemented:

* It *must* take as arguments all the independent variables that the model
  models the :term:`resolution` as a function of.

> * It *must* accept ``*args`` and ``**kwargs``.

Reviewer: Is this really a good idea? I suppose it is somewhat forced by formal OO interface type-checking things, but maybe there is a better way.

Anyway I guess it is accurate documentation for now 😅

* It *should* perform the remaining computation of the resolution, using the
  instance variables.
* It *must* return the resolution at the values of independent variables
  provided via the arguments.

For example:

.. code-block:: Python

    from jaxtyping import Float
    import numpy as np
    from resolution_functions.models.model_base import InstrumentModel

    class TestModel(InstrumentModel):
        def __call__(self, frequencies: Float[np.ndarray, 'frequencies'], *args, **kwargs
                     ) -> Float[np.ndarray, 'sigma']:
            return frequencies * self.useful_value

Then, with the model code complete, all that remains is to register it with
ResINS:

* If the above code is outside the ResINS repo (i.e. for personal use),

>   somewhere in your scrip/program (before the model is intended to be used), a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  somewhere in your program (before the model is intended to be used) a
```

  relevant model expects (see the associated API documentation, especially that
  of the ``ModelData`` subclass) and that is not included in ``configurations``.

  * It might be useful to look at the existing YAML files that use the same
    model as the ``configurations`` are likely to be the same. Normally, only
    the values of some of the parameters are likely to be different between
    different use-cases of the same model.

  * Ultimately, the ``parameters`` and ``configurations`` depend on the
    mathematics/physics of the :term:`model` and the physical :term:`INS`
    :term:`instrument`. If unsure, and especially when contributing to ResINS,
    do not hesitate to contact us on
    `our GitHub <https://github.com/pace-neutrons/resolution_functions>`_.

.. _howto-model-algorithm:

How to add a new algorithm for a new model
------------------------------------------

Creating a new :term:`model` that uses new physics/mathematics - ones that are
not yet implemented in ResINS - is significantly more work than the case above,
since Python code will have to be written. Though, before we start, some notes
on the procedures for different outcomes:

> * If working for personal use, the new code can be placed wherever - it will
>   have to be registered with ResINS, but this is straightforward and will be
>   noted in the text below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For personal use, the new code can be placed wherever - it will
  have to be registered with ResINS as explained below.
```

> * If contributing to ResINS, please create a new file in
>   ``resolution_functions/src/resolution_functions/models`` where all the new
>   code will go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If contributing to ResINS, please use a new file in
  ``resolution_functions/src/resolution_functions/models``.
```

combines the two before creating the data object (i.e. ``TestModelData``).

.. note::

    If the YAML file is going to contain default values and/or restrictions on
    some arguments for the model (e.g. the model takes ``e_init`` and YAML file
    specifies that the default value is ``100`` and that only values between
    ``10`` and ``1000`` are allowed), you will need to reimplement the
    :py:attr:`resolution_functions.models.model_base.ModelData.defaults` and/or
    :py:attr:`resolution_functions.models.model_base.ModelData.restrictions`
    properties (the documentation does not need to be overwritten, just the
    code). For example:

.. code-block:: Python

    from dataclasses import dataclass
    from typing import Any
    from resolution_functions.models.model_base import ModelData

    @dataclass(init=True, repr=True, frozen=True, slots=True, kw_only=True)
    class TestModelData(ModelData):
        default_e_init: int
        e_init_restrictions: list[int]

        @property
        def defaults(self) -> dict[str, list[int | float]]:
            return {'e_init': self.default_e_init}

        @property

>         def defaults(self) -> dict[str, Any]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        def restrictions(self) -> dict[str, Any]:
```

            return {'e_init': self.e_init_restrictions}

How to add a new model class
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With the data class in place, it is possible to create the model, which is a

> class, specifically a subclass of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subclass of
```

:py:class:`resolution_functions.models.model_base.InstrumentModel` (see its

> documentation for detailed specification of how to subclass it). This class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documentation for detailed specification of how to inherit from it). This
```

> **must** specify three class variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**must** specify three class-level variables:
```

* ``input`` - an integer specifying the number of arguments that the `
  `__call__`` method takes

* ``output`` - an integer specifying the number of outputs the ``__call__``
  method returns

* ``data_class`` - a reference to the data class
  :ref:`created above<howto-model-dataclass>`, for example:

.. code-block:: Python

    class TestModel(InstrumentModel):
        input = 1
        output = 1
        data_class = TestModelData

> Next, the ``__init__`` method should be defined:
> 
> * It *must* take ``model_data`` (an instance of the data class above) as its
>   first argument.
> * It *may* take any number of other argument (usually representing
>   :term:`settings<setting>`, but may be others).
> * It *must not* expect the independent variables (i.e. the variables that the
>   model is a function of such as energy transfer or momentum).
> * It *must* take ``**kwargs``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, the ``__init__`` method should be defined. The function signature:

* *Must* take ``model_data`` (an instance of the data class above) as its
  first argument.
* *May* take any number of other argument (usually representing
  :term:`settings<setting>`, but may be others).
* *Must not* expect the independent variables (i.e. the variables that the
  model is a function of such as energy transfer or momentum).
* *Must* take ``**kwargs``.
```

> In terms of what code it should contain:
> 
> * It *must* call ``super().__init__``
> * It *should* (if necessary) perform any validation of the arguments, e.g. that
>   the ``e_init`` is within the allowed range etc.
> * It *should* perform as much of the calculation as possible without the
>   independent variables. These pre-computed, intermediate values should be
>   stored as instance variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The body of ``__init__()``:

* *Must* call ``super().__init__``.
* *Should* (if necessary) perform any validation of the arguments, e.g. that
  the ``e_init`` is within the allowed range etc.
* *Should* perform as much of the calculation as possible without the
  independent variables. These pre-computed, intermediate values should be
  stored as instance variables.
```

  * For more complex calculations, it might be advisable to break them up into
    multiple methods. Any such methods should be private (i.e. start with ``_``)
    and, if possible, should be made ``@staticmethod`` or ``@classmethod``.

* It *should not* keep a reference to ``model_data``.

For example:

.. code-block:: Python

    from resolution_functions.models.model_base import InstrumentModel, InvalidInputError

    class TestModel(InstrumentModel):
        def __init__(self, model_data: TestModelData, e_init: float | None = None, **_):
            super().__init__(model_data)

            if e_init is None:
                e_init = model_data.default_e_init
            elif not model_data.e_init_restrictions[0] <= e_init <= model_data.e_init_restrictions[1]:

>                 raise InvalidInputError('Good message')

Author: We *could*, but I think it's better to access the underlying attributes directly rather than go through a newly-constructed dictionary (avoids having to construct the dictionary + hashing + resolving the hashmap). Besides, in the model itself, we are aware of all the underlying attributes, so there is no reason not to access them. In my mind, `defaults` and `restrictions` are the public interface aimed at users.

>                 raise InvalidInputError('Good message')

Reviewer: We could put some things on the base class to streamline that if we like. I guess at this stage its an implementation detail and not critical.

>                 raise InvalidInputError('Good message')

Author: This will require extensive re-work, see #23
